1 Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus through the will of God according to the promise of life, which is in Christ Jesus,
2 To Timothy, beloved child: Grace, mercy, peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord.
3 I thank God, whom I serve from my forefathers in a pure conscience, while unceasingly I have remembrance concerning you in my petitions night and day,
4 Longing to see you, remembering your tears, that I may be filled with joy;
5 Having been reminded of the unfeigned faith in you, which dwelt first in your grandmother Lois and your mother Eunice, and I am persuaded dwells also in you.
6 For which cause I remind you to fan into flame the gift of God, which is in you through the laying on of my hands.
7 For God has not given us a spirit of cowardice, but of power and of love and of sobermindedness.
8 Therefore do not be ashamed of the testimony of our Lord nor of me His prisoner; but suffer evil with the gospel according to the power of God;
9 Who has saved us and called us with a holy calling, not according to our works but according to His own purpose and grace, which was given to us in Christ Jesus before the times of the ages
10 But now has been manifested through the appearing of our Savior Christ Jesus, who nullified death and brought life and incorruption to light through the gospel,
11 For which I was appointed a herald and an apostle and a teacher.
12 For which cause also I suffer these things; but I am not ashamed, for I know whom I have believed, and I am persuaded that He is able to guard my deposit unto that day.
13 Hold a pattern of the healthy words that you have heard from me, in the faith and love which are in Christ Jesus.
14 Guard the good deposit through the Holy Spirit who dwells in us.
15 This you know, that all who are in Asia turned away from me, of whom are Phygelus and Hermogenes.
16 May the Lord grant mercy to the house of Onesiphorus, for he often refreshed me and was not ashamed of my chain;
17 But being in Rome, he sought me out diligently and found me.
18 May the Lord grant him to find mercy from the Lord in that day. And in how many things he served me in Ephesus, you know best.
1 You therefore, my child, be empowered in the grace which is in Christ Jesus;
2 And the things which you have heard from me through many witnesses, these commit to faithful men, who will be competent to teach others also.
3 Suffer evil with me as a good soldier of Christ Jesus.
4 No one serving as a soldier entangles himself with the affairs of this life, that he may please the one who enlisted him.
5 And also if anyone contends in the games, he is not crowned unless he contends lawfully.
6 The laboring farmer must be the first to partake of the fruit.
7 Consider what I say, for the Lord will give you understanding in all things.
8 Remember Jesus Christ, raised from the dead, of the seed of David, according to my gospel,
9 In which I suffer evil unto bonds as a criminal; but the word of God is not bound.
10 Therefore I endure all things for the sake of the chosen ones, that they themselves also may obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory.
11 Faithful is the word: For if we died with Him, we will also live with Him;
12 If we endure, we will also reign with Him; if we deny Him, He also will deny us;
13 If we are faithless, He remains faithful, for He cannot deny Himself.
14 Remind them of these things, solemnly charging them before God not to have contentions of words, which is useful for nothing, to the ruin of those who hear.
15 Be diligent to present yourself approved to God, an unashamed workman, cutting straight the word of the truth.
16 But avoid profane, vain babblings, for they will advance to more ungodliness,
17 And their word will spread like gangrene, of whom are Hymenaeus and Philetus,
18 Who concerning the truth have misaimed, saying that the resurrection has already taken place, and overthrow the faith of some.
19 However the firm foundation of God stands, having this seal, The Lord knows those who are His, and, Let everyone who names the name of the Lord depart from unrighteousness.
20 But in a great house there are not only gold and silver vessels but also wooden and earthen; and some are unto honor, and some unto dishonor.
21 If therefore anyone cleanses himself from these, he will be a vessel unto honor, sanctified, useful to the master, prepared unto every good work.
22 But flee youthful lusts, and pursue righteousness, faith, love, peace with those who call on the Lord out of a pure heart.
23 But foolish questionings and those arising from an untrained mind refuse, knowing that they beget contentions.
24 But a slave of the Lord ought not to contend but be gentle toward all, apt to teach, bearing with wrong;
25 In meekness correcting those who oppose, if perhaps God may give them repentance unto the full knowledge of the truth,
26 And they may return to soberness out of the snare of the devil, having been caught alive by him, unto His will.
1 But know this, that in the last days difficult times will come.
2 For men will be lovers of self, lovers of money, boasters, arrogant, revilers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy,
3 Without natural affection, implacable, slanderers, without self-control, savage, not lovers of good,
4 Traitors, reckless, blinded with pride, lovers of pleasure rather than lovers of God,
5 Having an outward form of godliness, though denying its power; from these also turn away.
6 For of these are those who creep into houses and take captive silly women heaped with sins, who are led by various desires
7 And are always learning yet never able to come to the full knowledge of the truth.
8 And in the manner that Jannes and Jambres opposed Moses, so these also oppose the truth; men corrupted in mind, disapproved concerning the faith.
9 But they will not advance farther, for their folly will be completely manifest to all, as also the folly of those became.
10 But you have closely followed my teaching, conduct, purpose, faith, long-suffering, love, endurance,
11 Persecutions, sufferings, such as befell me in Antioch, in Iconium, in Lystra. Such persecutions I bore, and out of them all the Lord delivered me.
12 And indeed all who desire to live godly in Christ Jesus will be persecuted.
13 But evil men and impostors will grow worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived.
14 But you, continue in the things which you have learned and have been assured of, knowing from which ones you have learned them
15 And that from a babe you have known the sacred writings, which are able to make you wise unto salvation through the faith which is in Christ Jesus.
16 All Scripture is God-breathed and profitable for teaching, for conviction, for correction, for instruction in righteousness,
17 That the man of God may be complete, fully equipped for every good work.
1 I solemnly charge you before God and Christ Jesus, who is to judge the living and the dead, and by His appearing and His kingdom:
2 Proclaim the word; be ready in season and out of season; convict, rebuke, exhort with all long-suffering and teaching.
3 For the time will come when they will not tolerate the healthy teaching; but according to their own lusts they will heap up to themselves teachers, having itching ears,
4 And they will turn away their ear from the truth and will be turned aside to myths.
5 But you, be sober in all things, suffer evil, do the work of an evangelist, fully accomplish your ministry.
6 For I am already being poured out, and the time of my departure is at hand.
7 I have fought the good fight; I have finished the course; I have kept the faith.
8 Henceforth there is laid up for me the crown of righteousness, with which the Lord, the righteous Judge, will recompense me in that day, and not only me but also all those who have loved His appearing.
9 Be diligent to come to me quickly;
10 For Demas has abandoned me, having loved the present age, and has gone to Thessalonica; Crescens to Galatia; Titus to Dalmatia.
11 Luke alone is with me. Take Mark and bring him with you, for he is useful to me for the ministry.
12 But Tychicus I have sent to Ephesus.
13 The cloak which I left in Troas with Carpus, bring when you come, and the scrolls, especially the parchments.
14 Alexander the coppersmith did many evil things to me; the Lord will recompense him according to his works.
15 You also guard against him, for he greatly opposed our words.
16 At my first defense no one was with me to support me, but all abandoned me. May it not be counted against them.
17 But the Lord stood with me and empowered me that through me the proclamation of the gospel might be fully accomplished and all the Gentiles might hear; and I was delivered out of the lion's mouth.
18 The Lord will deliver me from every evil work and will save me into His heavenly kingdom, to whom be the glory forever and ever. Amen.
19 Greet Prisca and Aquila and the house of Onesiphorus.
20 Erastus remained in Corinth, and Trophimus I left at Miletus sick.
21 Be diligent to come before winter. Eubulus greets you, as well as Pudens and Linus and Claudia and all the brothers.
22 The Lord be with your spirit. Grace be with you.
