1 Paul, a slave of God and an apostle of Jesus Christ according to the faith of God's chosen ones and the full knowledge of the truth, which is according to godliness,
2 In the hope of eternal life, which God, who cannot lie, promised before the times of the ages
3 But in its own times manifested His word in the proclamation with which I was entrusted according to the command of our Savior God;
4 To Titus, genuine child according to the common faith: Grace and peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Savior.
5 For this cause I left you in Crete, that you might set in order the things which I have begun that remain and appoint elders in every city, as I directed you:
6 If anyone is unreprovable, the husband of one wife, having believing children not accused of dissoluteness or unruly.
7 For the overseer must be unreprovable as a steward of God, not self-willed, not quick tempered, not an excessive drinker, not a striker, not greedy for base gain;
8 But hospitable, a lover of good, of a sober mind, righteous, holy, self-controlled;
9 Holding to the faithful word, which is according to the teaching of the apostles, that he may be able both to exhort by the healthy teaching and to convict those who oppose.
10 For there are many unruly men, vain talkers and deceivers, especially those of the circumcision,
11 Whose mouths must be stopped, who overthrow whole households, teaching things for the sake of base gain, which they ought not to do.
12 One from among themselves, a prophet of their own, said, Cretans are always liars, evil beasts, idle gluttons.
13 This testimony is true; for which cause reprove them severely that they may be healthy in the faith,
14 Not paying attention to Jewish myths and the commandments of men who turn away from the truth.
15 All things are pure to the pure; yet to those who are defiled and unbelieving nothing is pure, but both their mind and their conscience are defiled.
16 They profess to know God, but by their works they deny Him, being abominable and disobedient and, as to every good work, disapproved.
1 But you, speak the things which are fitting to the healthy teaching.
2 Exhort older men to be temperate, grave, of a sober mind, healthy in faith, in love, in endurance;
3 Older women likewise to be in demeanor as befits those who engage in sacred things, not slanderers, nor enslaved by much wine, teachers of what is good,
4 That they may train the young women to love their husbands, to love their children,
5 To be of a sober mind, pure, workers at home, good, subject to their own husbands, that the word of God would not be blasphemed.
6 The younger men likewise exhort to be of a sober mind,
7 Concerning all things presenting yourself as a pattern of good works: in your teaching showing incorruption, gravity,
8 Healthy speech that cannot be condemned, that he who opposes may be put to shame, having nothing evil to say about us.
9 Exhort slaves to be subject to their own masters in all things, to be well pleasing, not contradicting,
10 Not pilfering, but showing all good faithfulness that they may adorn the teaching of our Savior God in all things.
11 For the grace of God, bringing salvation to all men, has appeared,
12 Training us that, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly and righteously and godly in the present age,
13 Awaiting the blessed hope, even the appearing of the glory of our great God and Savior, Jesus Christ,
14 Who gave Himself for us that He might redeem us from all lawlessness and purify to Himself a particular people as His unique possession, zealous of good works.
15 These things speak, and exhort and convict with all authority. Let no one despise you.
1 Remind them to be subject to rulers, to authorities, to be obedient, to be ready unto every good work,
2 To slander no one, to be uncontentious, gentle, showing all meekness toward all men.
3 For we also were once foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving as slaves various lusts and pleasures, spending our lives in malice and envy, hateful, hating one another.
4 But when the kindness and the love to man of our Savior God appeared,
5 Not out of works in righteousness which we did but according to His mercy He saved us, through the washing of regeneration and the renewing of the Holy Spirit,
6 Whom He poured out upon us richly through Jesus Christ our Savior,
7 In order that having been justified by His grace, we might become heirs according to the hope of eternal life.
8 Faithful is the word, and concerning these things I desire you to confidently affirm, so that those who have believed in God may be careful to maintain respectable works. These things are good and profitable to men.
9 But avoid foolish questionings and genealogies and strifes and contentions about the law, for they are unprofitable and vain.
10 A factious man, after a first and second admonition, refuse,
11 Knowing that such a one is perverted and is sinning, though he is condemned by his own self.
12 When I send Artemas to you or Tychicus, be diligent to come to me at Nicopolis, for I have decided to spend the winter there.
13 Zenas the lawyer and Apollos send forward diligently that nothing may be lacking to them.
14 And let those also who are ours learn to maintain respectable works for their necessary needs, that they may not be unfruitful.
15 All who are with me greet you. Greet those who love us in faith. Grace be with you all.
